# Week 2: React, The Important Parts 🧐

- [React Components](#react-components)
- [State](#state)
- [User Interaction](#ui)

<h2 id="react-components">The Component Rulebook 📖</h2>

React uses **components** to organize complex websites into **small bits of code**. For example, the <u>src/App.js</u> file that we previously edited was a React component.

```jsx
import React from "react";

class HelloWorld extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <p>Hello World</p>;
  }
}

export default HelloWorld;
```

The `HelloWorld ` class above is also a React component. Notice how React components are also JavaScript classes. Sometimes we call them "component classes", it's the same thing.

JavaScript classes are no different from Java classes except that special modifiers and types (`public` and `int`) aren't necessary. This is cool, but how do we actually create a React component? There are some general rules that you should follow for every React component that you create.

```jsx
/* HelloWorld.js file */
// 1.
import React from "react";

// 2.
class HelloWorld extends React.Component {
  // 3.
  render() {
    return <p>Hello World</p>;
  }
}

// 4.
export default HelloWorld;
```

1. **Every React should must `import "react"`**. This follows the first rule—you need to import the React to extend it's `React.Component` class.
2. **Every React must extend the `React.Component` class**. If you don't, you'll get some nasty errors in your code. Extending  `React.Component` tells React that your class is not any ordinary JavaScript class—it's a React component.
3. **Every React component should have a `render()` method**. This tells React what to display to the user when the React component is used.
4. **Every file should have the same name as its component**, just like Java classes. Additionally, every file should `export default` their class. Should you want to import your component from another class, you'll need to make it accessible by exporting it.

That's it you've created a (basic) React component! If you ever get stuck on how to create a React component, come back to this. It's really important info. 😤

### Components in Depth

As stated in <u>Rule #4</u>, every React component is a JavaScript class contained in a single file.

```jsx
/* Message.js file */
// 1.
import React from "react";

// 2.
class Message extends React.Component {
  // 3.
  render() {
    let year = new Date().getFullYear();
    return <p>It's {year}!</p>
  }
}

// 4.
export default HelloWorld;
```

Above is a sample `Message` component. Notice how our `Message` component extends the `React.Component` class (<u>Rule #1</u>) . Also notice how our class has a  `render()` method (<u>Rule #3</u>) that returns some HTML-like syntax. I haven't yet gone over what this means, but you may have noticed what's going on here—the `render()` method is expected to return the *view* of a component class. 

#### lol, what's a "view"?

The *view* of a component is the code for what the user is able to see. It's basically the HTML that's attached to the component in question. In this instance, our view is "It's 2019!" because that's what the user would see if we were to use this component.

Ok, things are starting to make sense, but something's still odd here. Why is there HTML inside of our JavaScript anyway? Aren't HTML and JavaScript two separate langauges? To answer these questions, you must understand small syntax called **JSX**.

#### JSX in Plain English

JSX is a fancy way of creating HTML elements and new React components in JavaScript, nothing more. React developers use JSX because it's more readable than writing JavaScript.

```jsx
// This JSX represents a paragraph element with "It's 2019" inside.
<p>It's {new Date().getFullYear()}!</p>
```

The above is actually the exact same thing as...

```react
// Returns a paragraph element with "It's 2019" inside.
React.createElement("p", null, "It's "+ new Date().getFullYear() + "!");
```

In fact, React converts the above to the below under the hood. Both variants return **objects**, meaning that you can assign them to variables for later use.

```jsx
let pElement = <p>It's {new Date().getFullYear()}!</p>;
```

As I mentioned above, JSX is also used to create React components.

```jsx
let messageComponent = <Message />;
```

#### lol, what's with the curly braces?

One handy feature that JSX has is that it lets you insert or "interpolate" JavaScript expressions into elements using curly braces. An expression is any piece of code that returns a value.

```react
// We use curly braces to insert or "interpolate" expressions.
<p>It's {new Date().getFullYear()}!</p>
```

In this example,  the `new Date().getFullYear()` expression returns the current year as a number, which is then converted into a string by React and displayed as "It's 2019"

*P.S. Don't accidentally interpolate statements. Only [expressions](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18443801/in-programming-what-is-an-expression) are permitted!.*

```react
// ⛔️ You can't do this! "if" statements are not expressions.
<p>You { if (age < 21) { return "can't"; } return "can"; } legally drink!</p>
```

To make this code work as intended, you can replace the "if" statements with a [ternary expression](https://guide.freecodecamp.org/c/ternary-operator/).

```react
// ✅ Ternary expression.
<p>You { age < 21 ? "can't" : "can" } legally drink!</p>
```

### The Component Tree 🌴

Components are cool, but what if components could contain other components? React allows us to **nest** components, just like HTML. This creates a "tree" like data structure—components with other components as children.

```react
/* App.js file */
// 1. 
import React from "react";

// Import components from other componenet files.
// P.S. files in the same directory need a "./" in front.
import NavigationBar from "./NavigationBar.js";
import MainContainer from "./MainContainer.js";

// 2.
class App extends React.Component {
  // 3.
  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <NavigationBar />
        <MainContainer />
      </div>
    );
  }
}

// 4.
export default App;
```

Notice how our JSX contains some HTML and some React components. `div` is and HTML element while `NavigationBar` and `MainContainer` are both React components. This is intentional—get used to thinking about the React components that you create as ordinary HTML elements that you can import.

However, don't get too clever with nesting components. Because components form a "tree", each component definition can only contain one element.

```jsx
// ⛔️ This will give us some nasty errors. This components definition has multiple root nodes.
class App extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return (
        <NavigationBar />
        <MainContainer />
      	<div>Test</div>
    );
  }
}
```

```jsx
class App extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return (
      <div> {/* ✅ We absolutely need this div! Now our component definition only has one root node. */}
        <NavigationBar />
        <MainContainer />
        <div>Test</div>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```

<h2 id="state">State</h2>

In React, **state** is the smallest amount of information that a component needs to `render()` a view correctly. Notice how I italicized *minimum*. It's important that we keep our state as small as possible. Let's work through some examples!

Consider a todo application. More specifically, consider the minimum amound of information that you might need to make one. You'll likely need:

- A list of items `[]`
- Some indication of each item's completion and each items content `{ completed: true, name: "Sell concert tickets." }`

A **state object** for a todo application might look like...

```javascript
state = {
  items: [
    { completed: false, name: "Actually do my homework." },
    { completed: true, name: "Sell concert tickets." }
  ]
};
```

Notice how small this state object is. It's very clear what information the state object conveys here—a list of items, each with two properties, `completed` and `name`. This state object works well because it communicates the smallest amount of information that a component might need to know to render a view.

#### lol, what is this syntax?

In JavaScript, curly brackets  `{}`  and colons  `:`  are part of the [syntax](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_objects.asp) for defining properties and values for objects. In the example above, our **state object** has an `items` property which contains an array of objects with `completed` and `name` properties.

### Adding State to our View

In React, each component has it's own **state object**.

```jsx
/* TodoApp.js file */
import React from "react";

class TodoApp extends React.Component {
 	// State object
  state = {
    items: [
      { completed: false, name: "Actually do my homework." },
      { completed: true, name: "Sell concert tickets." }
    ]
  };
	
  render() {
    // Access the state object using "this." syntax, just like Java.
    return <div>You have {this.state.items.length} todo items.</div>;
  }
}

export default TodoApp;
```

In React, each component has a `render()` method. The `render()` method's main purpose is to display whatever the currrent **state object** contains.

This is the most React's most critical symbiosis.

This pattern is great because as we *modify* our `state` object it's very easy to predict what the `render()`  method will display. The beauty of React is that it automatically does the important work of figuring out when to call the `render()` method when we change our`state` object.

In the next section, User Interaction, I'll discuss the exact mechanism and process for *modifying* our `state ` object in response to user events such as mouse clicks.

### More complex views...

Let's modify our `render()` method to render the actual todo items instead of the length of our list. However, before doing so, let me introduce you to a special JavaScript method—the "map" method.

#### `map` all of the things

Every JavaScript array has a `map` method on it. The `map` method goes through every array item in order, calls a function on each one, and returns all of results in a new array.

```javascript
let numbers = [1, 5, 6, 2];

let squaredNumbers = numbers.map(function(number) {
  return number * number;
});
```

The result of the above function would be `[1, 25, 36, 4]`. Why? If we apply the function passed to the `map` method to every `number` in `numbers`, we get  `[1, 25, 36, 4]`.

Let's try another example.

```jsx
let foods = ["pho", "corn", "broccoli"];

let foodElements = foods.map((food) => {
  return <li>{food}</li>;
});
```

The result of the above call would be `[<li>pho<li>, <li>corn</li>, <li>broccoli</li>]`. This works because JSX element are objects, so they can be stored in arrays.

Notice how I used `(food) =>` instead of `function(food)  ` like the first example. The `=>  ` is called an arrow. `(food) =>` is an arrow function. Use arrow functions instead of regular functions.

Let's apply these lessons to our todo application.

```jsx
import React from "react";

class TodoApp extends React.Component {
  state = {
    items: [
      { completed: false, name: "Actually do my homework." },
      { completed: true, name: "Sell concert tickets." }
    ]
  };
	
  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        {
          this.state.items.map((item) => {
            return <p>{item.name} / {item.completed ? "Completed" : "Not Completed"}</p>;
          })
        }
      </div>
  	);
  }
}

export default TodoApp;
```

Here, I'm mapping through every item in state and returning an array of nicely formatted paragraph elements. Awesome! Now we know how to format our `state` into a nicely formatted view!

<h2 id="ui">User Interaction and Events ☝🏽</h2>
So how *do* we modify the state of React components? When a user clicks a part of the page, drags their mouse, or taps their keyboard, how do we respond? To modify the `state` of a React component, we use the `setState` method. This method comes for free in our component when we extend the `React.Component` class.

```jsx
/* Counter.js file */
import React from "react";

class Counter extends React.Component {
  state = {
    count: 0
  };

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <button onClick={() => {
        	this.setState({ count: this.state.count + 1 });
        }}>
          +
        </button>
        
        <button onClick={() => {
        	this.setState({ count: this.state.count - 1 });
        }}>
          -
        </button>
        
        <p>Counter: {this.state.count}</p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default Counter;
```

Above is an example of a Counter component. Every time that a user clicks on the "+" `button`, JavaScript triggers the function contained within the  `onClick` attribute on the `button` element.

This function calls the `setState` method, which updates the `count` property on the ` state` object by `1` more than it's previous value  ( `this.setState({ count: this.state.count + 1 })`). Notice how we don't modify the state object directly.

```javascript
// ⛔️ This does nothing. We don't modify the state object directly.
this.state.count = this.state.count + 1;
```
Instead, use `setState`. Using `setState` is the only way to properly modify state in React. Don't do the above.

```javascript
// ✅ This is valid. 
this.setState({
  count: this.state.count + 1
});
```

What's most important about the  `setState` method is that it updates the `state` object everywhere inside of the`render()` method when it is called. In this instance, after we click on the "+" `button`, our paragraph element displays a new, incremented value ([Check it out](https://codesandbox.io/s/react-counter-vvb10?fontsize=14)).

### Behind the scenes...

1. When the `button` is clicked, React calls the `onClick` function that we passed to it.
2. The  `onClick` calls the `setState` method which is used to update the `state` of our React component.
3. The  `setState` method updates the `state` with properties changed. `setState` sets the `count` property from value `this.state.count` to `this.state.count + 1`.
4. React calls the `render()` method with a fresh `this.state.count` value, so we see an updated value next to "Counter: ". Every time that we update a property value in our `state` object using the `setState` method, every place that we use the  `state` is automatically updated.

*P.S. Don't update state inside of your render method, your code will go into a never-ending infinite loop!*

```jsx
render() {
  // ⛔️ This is bad. Don't do this.
  this.setState({ count: count: this.state.count + 1 });
  
  return (
    <div>
      <p>Counter: {this.state.count}</p>
    </div>
  );
}
```

## Next steps 👣

- Play around with and extend this code in your editor!
- Edit the `state` object to make it your own and try rendering it with all different [HTML elements](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_elements.asp) that you've learned about!
- Create cool effects with different events. Try adding style and changing text in response to mouse events, scroll events, and other events.
- Follow these links to learn more about using CSS with React:
  - [Inline Styles](https://reactjs.org/docs/dom-elements.html#style)
  - [Styling with CSS](https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-styling.html)
  - [React Events](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html)
